# Welcome to Daryl Miller’s CS-499 Computer Science Capstone ePortfolio

Hello, my name is Daryl “DJ” Miller and I want to start by thanking you for taking the time to review my ePortfolio.  This ePortfolio serves as the culmination of my hard work during my course work here at Southern New Hampshire University (SNHU).  The objective of this ePortfolio is to demonstrate skills and abilities I have learned will completing my coursework.  This ePortfolio is comprised of the professional self-assessment, the code review, and three enhancements to artifacts I completed throughout this program.  Each of the three artifacts will correspond to demonstrated skills and abilities in the categories of software design and engineering, algorithms and data structures, and databases all the while adhering to the programs’ five course outcomes.

# Professional Self-Assessment

I began my computer science journey here at SNHU in the fall of 2018 and will complete my degree upon the completion of this course in the Spring of 2022.  Prior to starting this course, I had only a rudimentary understanding of computers and how things like hardware and software work behind the scenes.   Upon successfully completing this degree program, I have gained skills such what different components make up a computer, how to code in different languages, and how important security is to the overall computer science field.

This ePortfolio will focus primarily on the skills and abilities I have learned with respect to the three enhancements contained within.  These are not however a complete reflection of the skills and abilities I have learned while here at SNHU.  I have also demonstrated proficiency in areas such as Collaborating in a team environment, communicating to stakeholders, data structures and algorithms, software engineering, databases, and security.  I will take each of the auxiliary skills and abilities in turn and then focus primarily on the three artifacts to give anyone reading this ePortfolio in-depth information on each artifact and how it clearly aligns to the course outcomes of this program.

 Collaborating in a team environment is vital to any employee within a company.  Whether that is within the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) or somewhere else, a person must know how to work collaboratively in the modern agile workplace.  CS-310-J4779 Collaboration and Team Project is a perfect example of this as this course thought me how to collaborate on a software project by applying appropriate change control and versioning practices EGit.  This course shows how a programmer can successfully be part of either a co-located or geographically separated team.  It taught me skills such as branches, commits, and version control to allow the work I am doing to not negatively affect the work of my teammates.  

CS-250-J6435 Software Development Lifecycle reinforced the skills of working within a team and gave me experience filling various roles within an agile team such as the developer, tester, and scrum master.  This course also gave me experience communicating with key stake holders such as the delivery product owner, who would communicate with the customer of the product being developed.  This is vital as often developers are required to wear many different hats and be able to communicate at a more technical level within the team, but also be able to explain the program in plain English to key stakeholders.
Data structures and algorithms are one of the three key categories covered in this ePortfolio.  There are two courses that taught me the basics and advanced concepts of data structures and algorithms.   CS-260-J1278 Data Structures and Algorithms taught me how to use code and non-coding development methodologies in algorithmic design and problem solving.  This course also taught me the skills to used advanced algorithmic designs to evaluate complex data structures to aid in problem solving.  CS-340-T4084 Client/Server Development expanded on my data structure and algorithms skills by reinforcing the key concepts and teaching me how to apply database systems concepts and principles to develop client/server applications that interface client-side code with databases.  I was able to create algorithms using the Create, Read, Update, and Delete (CRUD) functionality to interact with the database all the while utilizing a Graphical User Interface (GUI) to manipulate the data.

Software Engineering is the second key categories and was covered heavily throughout this program.  Courses such as CS-360-H6813 Mobile Architecture and Programming taught me how to design a mobile application on the Android Operating System (OS) using Android Studio.  CS-330-J2957 Computational Graphics and Visualization gave me the skills to develop three-dimensional objects using Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) libraries and best practices.  Finally, CS-410-J1744 Software Reverse Engineering taught me the basics of reverse engineering specific software systems to recreate missing documentation and to support legacy software code.  This course also taught me how reverse engineering is used to make new software products, enhance the functionality and efficiency of software components, and recreate the code for applications.

Databases is the final key category covered within this ePortfolio and is highlighted by several courses throughout this program.  DAD-220-J3007 Introduction to Structured Database Environments taught me the basic skills of creating structured database environments that incorporate basic processing functionality and allow for data management, data manipulation, and data analysis using MySQL.  This course was again reinforced using CS-340-T4084 Client/Server Development to expand into the Mongo Database as another database centric skill.  

Security is the backbone of any program and should always be on the forefront of a developer’s mind.  CS-405-T2675 Secure Coding was the quintessential course that taught security to a new programmer like me.  This course focused on common security vulnerabilities that a developer is often faced with.  This course taught me techniques and strategies to develop secure code and leverage secure programming principles.  I got authentic experience identifying security vulnerabilities and writing secure code to mitigate risks to software and data.

The first enhancement, which can be accessed at this link on Github, is a zoo monitoring program, which satisfies the requirement for the software design and engineering key category.  The original artifact was completed in IT-145-R5558 Foundation in Application Development.  This artifact is a java application that monitors zoo animals and exhibits.  The main java application uses buffer readers, file readers and scanners to perform actions such as accept input from the user and get information from external text sources.  The enhancement made to this artifact includes expanding upon the original sample size of the animals and exhibits, as well as adding additional features such as zoo staff.  I also streamlined the program to make it leaner and added additional comments to give a first-time programmer more understanding of what each block of code does toward the overall execution of the program.

The second enhancement, which can be accessed at this link on Github, is an algorithm-based program that uses vector sorting to satisfy the requirements for the data structures and algorithms key category.  The original artifact was completed in CS-260-J1278 Data Structures and Algorithms.  This artifact is a vector sorting application written in C++.  The main idea behind this application is to load a .csv file to display and sort bids for an auction.  The main enhancement I made to this artifact was to incorporate the linked list algorithm and added additional features such as allowing the user to enter, find, remove, and prepend a bid.

The third and final enhancement, which can be accessed at this link on Github, is a SQL program used to satisfy the databases key category.  The original artifact was completed in DAD-220-J3007 Introduction to Structured Database Environments.  I chose to include this artifact into my ePortfolio because it shows a lot of the skills required to be a SQL developer.  Though the original artifact is fictious and basic, it can be attributed to many of the current SQL databases implemented by companies today. This artifact highlights some of the Create, Read, Update, Delete (CRUD) skills needed to maintain a SQL database.  The main enhancements I made to the SQL was to expand upon its complexity and add advanced concepts of SQL.

# Code Review

I performed my first code review ever in my computer science journey, but quickly understood the importance of code review and how it fits within the SDLC and other aspects of collaboration between a team.  The practice of code review is important because it allows developers, either individually or part of a team, to break down their application by certain blocks of code and review it for things such as structure, documentation, variables, arithmetic operations, loops and branches, and defensive programming.  This is a part to whole approach that allows the programmers to break down their code into more manageable pieces to begin reviewing it, which in turn will eventually lead to a more defect free product once it is passed to the Quality Assurance (QA) team.  This code review will analyze each of the three original artifacts and discusses the enhancements I intended to make to each.  My published code review can be found on YouTube by using this link.
